Risk management is a crucial point in any information systems. Usually a risk is defined as a likelihood of some incident and its consequence to an asset. The risks value is then calculated from these values and counter measures are decided based on these values. Our opinion is that these standard risk calculations tend to forget one important factor: how much power the actors that are potentially interested in the asset do have. This power can be for example money, time, legislation or law related impact, skill related possibilities like the skills of the actor or the actor's ability to acquire such skills. Forgetting this factor might easily lead into misscategorization of the risk's value. Say there is a company which would like to use commonly used cloud services like Microsoft's O365 and use this as company's collaboration tool with a clausule that no classified data can be added to the service. Quite naturally this would categorize the value of the asset quite low. The company doesn't have knowledge of any breaches targeted at the service, thus the likelihood also is very low. But what if the asset interests for example a multi billion actor's interests? Say now this service provides a centralized publicly available target to acquire data like personal data, which again could be used as a source for other types of attacks. Thus the likelihood is kind of higher as it interests an actor with motivation and assets to acquire it.


(Stølen, Ketil, Atle Refsdal, and Bjørnar Solhaug. Cyber-Risk Management. Springer. © 2015. Books24x7. <http://common.books24x7.com.ezproxy.jamk.fi:2048/toc.aspx?bookid=115793> (accessed September 22, 2018) )



A cloud based environment presents several new risks, not forgetting the fact it also mitigates some others. Especially with public clouds the customer has only limited capabilities to affect business related decisions, which might pose a great risk. There are examples where actions like this have realized. For example, in February 24 2018 the news reported that Apple had made a decision to move the encryption keys of Chinese iCloud customers to a Chinese service provider. This was presumed to increase the risk of a governmental actor to get access to the keys (https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-apple-icloud-insight/apple-moves-to-store-icloud-keys-in-china-raising-human-rights-fears-idUSKCN1G8060, accessed 22.9.2018). This article is a good reminder that there might be providers who would grant access to data under a pressure or legislative force for powerful actors like governments.

Also other very visible risks appear. As long as you have a clearly defined physical boundaries where the data is located, things are a bit simpler. Introducing a geographically separated physical area expands or even breaks this physical boundary. You should now be able to also monitor this separate location, as well as the interfaces it has to the internal zones. 

In addition, risk analysis in a cloud based environment can be harder, when speaking of public clouds. Things like interviews can be a valuable tool when identifying risks (Stølen, Ketil, Atle Refsdal, and Bjørnar Solhaug. Cyber-Risk Management. Springer. © 2015. Books24x7. <http://common.books24x7.com.ezproxy.jamk.fi:2048/toc.aspx?bookid=115793> (accessed September 22, 2018) ), but interviewing any technical persons from a third party hosted cloud can be a real challenge. This can lead into a crippled risk identification process if not taken properly into account. It is obvious that this type of problem can realise even in non-cloud environemnts where the personnel isn't committed to the process.


Benefits of cloud to protect data and services

Although cloud environments can introduce several risks, they also provide an opportunity to improve the security. Several ideas are introduced in this section. Cloud has the advantage of being versatile, agile and distributed. These features can be used even in the well-known technologies.

Improving security with cloud native applications

Cloud native applications are services, which are specifically build to recognize the surrounding provided by the cloud <todo: find a proper description>. The application can adjust to things like load and location. One idea of fighting attacks with cloud native solutions is provided by Nane Kratzke. With for example open source tehcnologies like Kubernetes or Docker Swarm an environment that would move fast in case an attack is noticed could be made. An example solution could be a container based application, on top of virtual machines that could be in geographically disperse clouds and from different cloud providers. In case there is an attack directed at the platform, the containers could be moved to another environment, for example to another service provider before an attacker can gain a foothold at the environment. According to the paper, there are no known approaches to use this technology for security based solutions (About being the Tortoise or the Hare? A Position Paper on Making Cloud Applications too Fast and Furious for Attackers. Nane Kratzke, 2018. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.03565.pdf. Read 18.4.2018 <todo: check the date>). Nevertheless, as availability is considered one aspects of security, this technique is well-known to provide this. To be used in the general context of security, there are some issues with this approach, as it is often hard to recognize underlying attacks. This we believe could be acquired at least to some extend with other traditional tehcnologies like SIEM, log analyzing and bug reports to name a few.





